---
layout: post
title: S-expressions
---

# S-expressions

([**sexpr**](../../../2012/12/06/sexpr.html)
&nbsp;[lexer](../../../2012/12/07/sexpr-lexer.html)
&nbsp;[reader](../../../2012/12/08/sexpr-reader.html))

A symbolic expression is a notation of a nested list structure. It's origin
lies within the LISP family of programming languages whose entire syntax
consists of these expressions.

I want to introduce you to the syntax and in subsequent posts go into how it
can be parsed and interpreted.

## Syntax

An s-expression is either an atom or an ordered pair of s-expressions. In
practice that just means that you have lists of s-expressions that can be
nested.

An atom is a symbol which is essentially a value that is not a list. Here are
a few examples of atoms:

* `foo`
* `an-atom`
* `42`

Lists are represented by parentheses. They can be empty, or hold atoms,
delimited by spaces.

* `()`
* `(foo)`
* `(foo bar)`
* `(foo bar baz)`

Lists can also contain other lists, allowing them to be nested:

* `((foo) (bar))`
* `((a 1) (b 2))`
* `(alpha (beta (gamma (delta))))`

This should give you a basic understanding of how the sexpr syntax works.

## Representing data

You can use this format to represent data, just as you would use XML or JSON.
In fact, let's take the `composer.json` from
[YOLO](https://github.com/igorw/yolo) (the microframework with swag):

    {
        "name": "igorw/yolo",
        "description": "The microframework with swag.",
        "keywords": ["useless", "microframework", "academic", "swag"],
        "license": "MIT",
        "authors": [
            {
                "name": "Igor Wiedler",
                "email": "igor@wiedler.ch"
            }
        ]
        ...
    }

And transpose it to sexpr:

    (dict (name "igorw/yolo")
          (description "The microframework with swag.")
          (keywords '(useless microframework academic swag))
          (license "MIT")
          (authors (list (dict (name "Igor Wiedler")
                               (email "igor@wiedler.ch")))))

A few things worth noting:

* There is a `dict` keyword, which produces a dictionary from the pairs it
  receives as arguments.
* Strings are written between quotes, which groups them from the whitespace.
* The `keywords` are represented by a quoted list of atoms.
* The data in `authors` is explicitly constructed as a list using a `list`
  construct.

Try not to worry about those details too much at this point. This is just one
possible way of representing that data.

> Side note: Wouldn't it be awesome if composer supported `composer.sexpr`
> files natively, so that we would no longer have to write JSON? No, not
> really.

## Representing code

What's really fascinating about s-expressions is that they can be used to
represent not only data, but also code.

Here is one of the most basic LISP code snippets:

    (+ 1 2)

It looks cryptic, but it's actually quite simple. Instead of infix notation,
this is using Polish notation, also known as *prefix notation*. What the
expression represents is this:

    1 + 2

The parantheses tell you that it's a *function application* or
function invocation. The first element of the list is a function, the
remaining elements are the arguments passed to that function. `+` is simply a
function which sums up any arguments it receives.

So what about other functions, that are not operators? They work the same way.
For example, this application:

    (foo a b)

Would be written like this in PHP:

    foo($a, $b);

That's about as far as I will go in this post. This should give you an idea
about the basics of the syntax and how to read it. Stay tuned for follow-up
posts.

## Conclusion

* S-expressions are a strange looking format that is simple, yet powerful.
* They can represent both data and code.
* I want to know how to parse them in PHP.
